
# Abstract

This paper presents the design, implementation model, and formal
definition of the Trust Contract Framework within the Resonance Protocol
(RP). Building upon the concepts introduced in the prior whitepapers,
*The Subsumption Hive Model for Ransomware Defence* and *RP
Architectural Whitepaper*, this work defines the mechanism by which
Subsumption Hives establish, verify, and maintain cryptographically
authenticated communication channels through dynamically generated Trust
Contract Certificates (TCCs).

The Trust Contract Framework provides a deterministic method for
maintaining verifiable, state-bound trust between autonomous digital
systems. Each hive cryptographically attests to its internal integrity
using Merkle ancestry. When two hives initiate contact, a Handshake
Exchange Sequence (HES) verifies both integrity states before generating
a state-dependent contract. This contract governs subsequent encrypted
communications, which automatically invalidate upon tampering or
configuration drift, resulting in autonomous isolation.

# Introduction

The Resonance Protocol (RP) extends zero-trust architecture by coupling
identity verification with device integrity attestation. In traditional
zero-trust environments, communication between systems is authenticated
based on credentials and policies, yet assumes static system integrity.
The RP removes this assumption, requiring each hive to demonstrate not
only valid credentials but also verifiable internal consistency before
participating in the network.

The Trust Contract Framework operationalises this concept. It defines a
dynamic, measurable trust state between Adjacent Hives, replacing
implicit assumptions of security with mathematically verifiable
conditions.

Through the TCC mechanism, RP establishes peer-to-peer channels in which
the cryptographic keys are derived from, and dependent upon, the
verified state of the communicating hives. The moment a hive's state
changes, its communication context becomes invalid, causing automatic
contract revocation.

# Related Work and Context

The Subsumption Hive Model introduced in earlier RP publications
describes systems as layered entities, hardware, firmware, kernel,
process, and application, where each layer verifies the one beneath it.
Integrity proofs are consolidated via Merkle ancestry, producing a
single Merkle root that represents the hive's complete internal
integrity.

This whitepaper focuses on the next stage: how these verified hives
interact securely. While conventional attestation models (e.g.,
TPM-based remote attestation, IETF RATS) focus on one-way verification,
the Trust Contract Framework introduces bidirectional, state-linked
trust relationships that form, maintain, and revoke autonomously.

# System Overview

Each Subsumption Hive maintains a self-contained record of its
components, stored as Merkle trees under /hives/\<hive_name\>/. The
Merkle root acts as a condensed fingerprint of the hive's integrity.

When two adjacent hives attempt communication, the following sequence
occurs:

1.  Both hives must be in *ready-active* state, signalling verified
    integrity.

2.  The initiating hive transmits a Handshake Initiation Frame (HIF),
    containing its identifier, nonce, and signed Merkle root.

3.  The recipient responds with its own Handshake Response Frame (HRF)
    containing equivalent data.

4.  Each hive independently verifies the other's attestation.

5.  Upon mutual validation, a Trust Contract Certificate (TCC) is
    generated, cryptographically binding both Merkle roots.

# Trust Contract Formation

A Trust Contract Certificate (TCC) is a data structure that defines the
cryptographic and logical relationship between two validated hives. It
contains:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   **[Field]{.underline}**          **[Description]{.underline}**
  -------------------------- --------------------------------------------
          issuer_id                Unique UUID of originating hive

         recipient_id                   UUID of recipient hive

      issuer_merkle_root          Latest Merkle root of issuer hive

    recipient_merkle_root        Latest Merkle root of recipient hive

          valid_from             Epoch timestamp of contract creation

         valid_until                Expiry or revocation timestamp

            scope                  Permitted communication domains

       signature_issuer              Digital signature of issuer

     signature_recipient            Digital signature of recipient
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

# Cryptographic Derivation

The contract's cryptographic strength is derived from the inclusion of
both hives' Merkle roots as contextual data within the key exchange
process. The shared secret is established as:

$$shared\_ secret\  = \ HKDF(ECDH(a\_ private,\ b\_ public)$$

$$\ info = (root\_ A\ ||\ root\_ B\ ||\ nonce\_ A\ ||\ nonce\_ B))$$

This ensures that encryption keys are valid only when both hives
maintain their verified internal states. Any change to a hive's Merkle
root immediately invalidates the session's derived key material.

# Handshake and Cryptographic Design

## Handshake Exchange Sequence (HES)

The handshake process (HES) consists of the following stages:

1.  **Integrity Announcement:**

Each hive broadcasts readiness via multicast or controller registry,
including a signed attestation hash.

2.  **Nonce Exchange:**

Both hives exchange nonces to guarantee freshness and prevent replay.

3.  **Mutual Attestation Verification:**

Each hive validates the received Merkle root against its registry of
trusted states.

4.  **Shared Secret Derivation:**

An ECDH exchange is performed, incorporating Merkle context into HKDF.

5.  **TCC Generation:**

Both hives sign and exchange the final Trust Contract Certificate.

6.  **Session Establishment:**

Encrypted channels (TLS/IPSec) are negotiated using derived session
keys.

## Time Constraints

Each TCC is designed to be short-lived. Default lifetime recommendations
are ≤15 minutes for volatile systems and ≤1 hour for stable devices.
Renewal requires re-attestation.

# State-Bound Communication and Verification Logic

All data transmission between hives occurs under an IPSec or TLS tunnel
using AEAD ciphersuites (e.g., AES-GCM, ChaCha20-Poly1305).

Every outbound packet includes a state validation token, containing:

- session_id

- contract_id

- merkle_digest_current

The receiving hive validates that the Merkle digest matches the last
attested root associated with the active TCC. If it differs, the packet
is discarded, and the session enters degraded verification mode.

# Contract Lifecycle and Revocation Mechanisms

## Normal Lifecycle

1.  **Creation:** Generated upon successful handshake.

2.  **Active:** Used for session encryption and validation.

3.  **Refresh:** Revalidated automatically before expiry if no integrity
    deltas exist.

4.  **Expiry:** Contract expires and is renewed via a new handshake.

## Revocation Conditions

A TCC is revoked under the following conditions:

- Integrity delta detected (Merkle mismatch).

- Heartbeat timeout beyond tolerance threshold.

- Explicit revocation broadcast from Controller Hive.

- Signed notification from peer hive marking itself unhealthy.

Upon revocation:

1.  All sessions tied to the TCC are dropped.

2.  Session keys are securely deleted.

3.  Adjacent hives mark each other as quarantined until successful
    re-attestation.

# Failure Handling and Recovery

When a hive fails integrity verification:

1.  It transitions to Unhealthy State.

2.  All adjacent contracts are invalidated.

3.  Logs are written to local immutable audit storage.

4.  The hive attempts self-repair (rollback or restoration).

5.  Post-recovery, a Re-attestation Sequence (RAS) occurs to obtain new
    contracts.

Recovery policies can be centrally managed by a Controller Hive or
locally autonomous depending on deployment topology.

# Security Analysis

The Trust Contract Framework provides several inherent security
guarantees:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      **Property**                      **Description**
  -------------------- --------------------------------------------------
     **State-linked     Keys are only valid for verified system states.
      encryption**     

      **Automatic          Tampered hives are instantly disconnected.
      isolation**      

        **Replay          Nonce and timestamp enforcement prevent old
      protection**                      contract reuse.

  **Forward secrecy**    Ephemeral keys prevent retroactive decryption.

    **Auditability**    Every contract issuance and revocation is logged
                                       cryptographically.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

# Attack Surface Considerations

- **DoS Resistance:** Integrity validation includes a grace window to
  avoid disconnect storms.

- **Rollback Protection:** Historical Merkle ancestry is tracked to
  detect reversion attempts.

- **Privacy:** Only blinded Merkle roots are shared; component hashes
  remain internal.

# Implementation Considerations

A reference implementation uses:

- **ECDH (Curve25519)** for key exchange.

- **HKDF-SHA512** for key derivation.

- **AES-GCM-256** for symmetric encryption.

- **Ed25519** for contract signing.

TCCs are serialised as JSON or CBOR objects, signed using detached
signatures. Implementations must use monotonic clocks for expiry
enforcement and store revocation data in an append-only ledger for audit
consistency.

# Conclusion

The Trust Contract Framework operationalises the principle of
*verifiable integrity as a prerequisite for communication*. Through its
use of state-linked cryptography, short-lived attestation, and
autonomous revocation, it establishes a foundational shift in how
distributed systems maintain trust.

By embedding integrity verification into the communication layer itself,
the Resonance Protocol eliminates the separation between system health
and security posture, ensuring that trust is continuously earned, never
assumed.

# References

1.  Collinson, L. *Resonance Protocol: Technical Subsumption Hive
    Ransomware Defence.* Cyber Security Stack, 2024.

2.  Collinson, L. *Resonance Protocol: Architectural Whitepaper.* Cyber
    Security Stack, 2024.

3.  IETF RATS Working Group. *Remote Attestation Procedures Architecture
    (RFC 9334).* 2023.

4.  NIST. *Zero Trust Architecture (SP 800-207).* 2020.

5.  IETF. *The Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (RFC 7296).*
    2014.
